README.md, before:

# DUECA Delft University Environment for Communication and Activation

## What is this?

DUECA is a "middleware library" for distributed (over computers)
real-time calculation processes. Modules written to use DUECA can
communicate with other modules running in a possibly distributed DUECA
process, no matter where these other modules are located. In addition
each module can specify its update rate, and access to data of the
"right time" is automatically given by DUECA.

DUSIME (Delft University SIMulation Environment) builds forth on
DUECA, to give you an environment tailored to implement real-time
(hardware in the loop and man in the loop) simulations.

DUECA/DUSIME has been used for over 20 years at the Control and
Simulation department, Aerospace Engineering, TU Delft. It forms the
backbone for many simulation projects and experiments on the SIMONA
Research Simulator and other facilities. It is released as open source
in 2022.

## How is it implemented?

It is implemented as:

 * A set of libraries, dueca, dueca-extra (additional tools), dueca-dusime,
   dueca-inter, dueca-udpcom, dueca-websock, dueca-hdf5, dueca-ddff

 * Support scripts for setting up simulations, code generation, etc.

 * There is also [Documentation](https://dueca.tudelft.nl/doc/), which
   can be generated from the `doc` folder.

 * Some example code.

## What is in here?

- The `dueca` folder contains the DUECA core code; modules, channels,
  and some older communication tools. Its `gui` subfolder contains
  graphical interfaces.

- The `extra` folder contains a hodge-podge of helper stuff that may
  be useful in implementing simulations.

- `dusime` contains the code supporting simulations.

- The folder `hdf5utils` contains generic logging code with hdf5.

- The folder `udpcom` contains the code that links DUECA executables
  over a network.

- The folder `inter` can connect multiple DUECA processes, similar to
  HLA or DIS.

- The code generator for communicatable objects is in `pycodegen`.

- With the `websock` addition DUECA can offer websocket communication.

- The `obs` folder contains build files for rpm-based or deb-based
  distributions. Currently building for Debian, Ubuntu, Fedora and
  OpenSUSE.

## Building and running

DUECA can use, depending on how you configure it, a considerable
number of third party libraries. The main interface is created in GTK,
(versions 2 and 3 currently). The simulation set-up is scripted in
either Python (currently preferred) or Guile (scheme).

When you are looking to use DUECA for your simulation, rather than
work on DUECA's development, the best way to start is with the
packages compiled on the OpenSUSE build service in the
[repabuild](https://build.opensuse.org/project/show/home:repabuild)
project.

For inspecting DUECA itself or development work on the middleware,
start with `linuxtmp.script` or `osxtmp.script` (as it sometimes
runs/builds on OSX with macports), and install dependencies as needed.

Note that by itself, DUECA won't do anything, you need to create your
own application code to make a project. You can check out and run the
DuecaTestCommunication project, but note that that project's only use
is as a test vehicle. The documentation also details how you can make
a project named SimpleSimulation.

After having installed DUECA (through compilation or from packages),
you can start to use it in development of simulation projects. Please
check the documentation for the `dueca-gproject` script. You will need
an "upstream" git repository for your code.

## References

Paassen, M. M. van, Olaf Stroosma, and J. Delatour. “DUECA -
Data-Driven Activation in Distributed Real-Time Computation.” In AIAA
Modeling and Simulation Technologies Conference, 7. Denver (CA):
American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, 2000. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2000-4503.

## Acknowledgements

Jerome, for entertaining the initial ideas

Colleagues and students, for feedback on bugs and features

Conchi, Daniel and Alexandra, for sharing their time.

Commit message:

add description ddff to README.md

README.md, after:

# DUECA Delft University Environment for Communication and Activation

## What is this?

DUECA is a "middleware library" for distributed (over computers)
real-time calculation processes. Modules written to use DUECA can
communicate with other modules running in a possibly distributed DUECA
process, no matter where these other modules are located. In addition
each module can specify its update rate, and access to data of the
"right time" is automatically given by DUECA.

DUSIME (Delft University SIMulation Environment) builds forth on
DUECA, to give you an environment tailored to implement real-time
(hardware in the loop and man in the loop) simulations.

DUECA/DUSIME has been used for over 20 years at the Control and
Simulation department, Aerospace Engineering, TU Delft. It forms the
backbone for many simulation projects and experiments on the SIMONA
Research Simulator and other facilities. It is released as open source
in 2022.

## How is it implemented?

It is implemented as:

 * A set of libraries, dueca, dueca-extra (additional tools), dueca-dusime,
   dueca-inter, dueca-udpcom, dueca-websock, dueca-hdf5, dueca-ddff

 * Support scripts for setting up simulations, code generation, etc.

 * There is also [Documentation](https://dueca.tudelft.nl/doc/), which
   can be generated from the `doc` folder.

 * Some example code.

## What is in here?

- The `dueca` folder contains the DUECA core code; modules, channels,
  and some older communication tools. Its `gui` subfolder contains
  graphical interfaces.

- The `extra` folder contains a hodge-podge of helper stuff that may
  be useful in implementing simulations.

- `dusime` contains the code supporting simulations.

- The folder `hdf5utils` contains generic logging code with hdf5.

- The folder `udpcom` contains the code that links DUECA executables
  over a network.

- The folder `inter` can connect multiple DUECA processes, similar to
  HLA or DIS.

- The code generator for communicatable objects is in `pycodegen`.

- With the `websock` addition DUECA can offer websocket communication.

- The `obs` folder contains build files for rpm-based or deb-based
  distributions. Currently building for Debian, Ubuntu, Fedora and
  OpenSUSE.

- the `ddff` folder contains the code for yet another logging format,
  custom-created for efficiently saving and re-loading streaming
  data. This logging format is used by the `dusime` modules to
  implement record and replay within simulations.

## Building and running

DUECA can use, depending on how you configure it, a considerable
number of third party libraries. The main interface is created in GTK,
(versions 2 and 3 currently). The simulation set-up is scripted in
either Python (currently preferred) or Guile (scheme).

When you are looking to use DUECA for your simulation, rather than
work on DUECA's development, the best way to start is with the
packages compiled on the OpenSUSE build service in the
[repabuild](https://build.opensuse.org/project/show/home:repabuild)
project.

For inspecting DUECA itself or development work on the middleware,
start with `linuxtmp.script` or `osxtmp.script` (as it sometimes
runs/builds on OSX with macports), and install dependencies as needed.

Note that by itself, DUECA won't do anything, you need to create your
own application code to make a project. You can check out and run the
DuecaTestCommunication project, but note that that project's only use
is as a test vehicle. The documentation also details how you can make
a project named SimpleSimulation.

After having installed DUECA (through compilation or from packages),
you can start to use it in development of simulation projects. Please
check the documentation for the `dueca-gproject` script. You will need
an "upstream" git repository for your code.

## References

Paassen, M. M. van, Olaf Stroosma, and J. Delatour. “DUECA -
Data-Driven Activation in Distributed Real-Time Computation.” In AIAA
Modeling and Simulation Technologies Conference, 7. Denver (CA):
American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, 2000. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2000-4503.

## Acknowledgements

Jerome, for entertaining the initial ideas

Colleagues and students, for feedback on bugs and features

Conchi, Daniel and Alexandra, for sharing their time.
